[FLINK-17161][docs][docker] Document the official docker hub image and examples of how to use it (#12131)
apache/flink: docs/ops/deployment/docker.md

-->

[Docker](https://www.docker.com) is a popular container runtime. 
There are Docker images for Apache Flink available [on Docker Hub](https://hub.docker.com/_/flink).
You can use the docker images to deploy a Session or Job cluster in a containerised environment, e.g.
[standalone Kubernetes](kubernetes.html) or [native Kubernetes](native_kubernetes.html).

* This will be replaced by the TOC
{:toc}

## Docker Hub Flink images

The [Flink Docker repository](https://hub.docker.com/_/flink/) is hosted on
Docker Hub and serves images of Flink version 1.2.1 and later.

### Image tags

Images for each supported combination of Flink and Scala versions are available, and
[tag aliases](https://hub.docker.com/_/flink?tab=tags) are provided for convenience.

For example, you can use the following aliases: *(`1.11.y` indicates the latest release of Flink 1.11)*

* `flink:latest` → `flink:<latest-flink>-scala_<latest-scala>`

> * `flink:1.11` → `flink:1.11.y-scala_2.11`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `flink:1.11` → `flink:1.11.<latest-flink-1.11>-scala_2.11`
```
?
Then we could also remove "*(`1.11.y` indicates the latest release of Flink 1.11)*"

<span class="label label-info">Note</span> Prio to Flink 1.5 version, Hadoop dependencies were always bundled with Flink.
You can see that certain tags include the version of Hadoop, e.g. (e.g. `-hadoop28`).
Beginning with Flink 1.5, image tags that omit the Hadoop version correspond to Hadoop-free releases of Flink
that do not include a bundled Hadoop distribution.

## How to run Flink image

The Flink image contains a regular Flink distribution with its default configuration and a standard entry point script.
You can run its standard entry point in the following modes:

> * Flink Master for [a Session cluster](#start-a-session-cluster)

Author: do you think we should link the glossary everywhere then or just once in the beginning? because the glossary is a crosscutting for all docs as I understand

> * Flink Master for [a Session cluster](#start-a-session-cluster)

Author: I have at least highlight all these concepts with \*Flink Master\*

* Flink Master for [a Single Job cluster](#start-a-single-job-cluster)
* TaskManager for any cluster

This allows to deploy a standalone cluster (Session or Single Job) in any containerised environment, for example:
* manually in a local docker setup,
* [in a Kubernetes cluster](kubernetes.html),
* [with Docker Compose](#flink-with-docker-compose),
* [with Docker swarm](#flink-with-docker-swarm).

<span class="label label-info">Note</span> [The native Kubernetes](native_kubernetes.html) also runs the same image by default
and deploys TaskManagers on demand so that you do not have to do it.

The next chapters describe how to start a single Flink docker container for various purposes.

### Start a Session Cluster

A Flink Session cluster can be used to run multiple jobs. Each job needs to be submitted to the cluster after it has been deployed.
To deploy a Flink Session cluster with docker, you need to start a Flink Master container:

```sh
docker run flink:{% if site.is_stable %}{{site.version}}-scala{{site.scala_version_suffix}}{% else %}latest{% endif %} jobmanager
```

> and required number of TaskManager containers:

Author: Do you mean you have a concern?
I can change to:
`and one or more *TaskManager* containers:`

> and required number of TaskManager containers:

Author: no big worries, just trying to be more explicit, I think this reassures unexperienced users

```sh
docker run flink:{% if site.is_stable %}{{site.version}}-scala{{site.scala_version_suffix}}{% else %}latest{% endif %} taskmanager
```

### Start a Single Job Cluster

A Flink Job cluster is a dedicated cluster which runs a single job.

> The job artifacts should be already available locally in the container and, thus, there is no extra job submission needed.

Author: ok, how about this:
```
A *Flink Job cluster* is a dedicated cluster which runs a single job.
In this case, you deploy the cluster with the job as one step, thus, there is no extra job submission needed.
Therefore, the job artifacts should be already available locally in the container.
```

To deploy a cluster for a single job with docker, you need to

> * make job artifacts available locally *in all containers* under `/opt/flink/usrlib`,

Author: True, I have not found any general description of the job standalone cluster, independent from deployment environment. We should add it and then adjust docker docs to refer to it. For now, I can add e.g.:
```
The *job artifacts* are included into the class path of Flink's JVM process within the container and consist of:
* your job jar, which you would normally submit to a *Session cluster* and
* all other necessary dependencies or resources, not included into Flink.
```

* start a Flink Master container in the Single Job mode
* and required number of TaskManager containers.

To make the **job artifacts available** locally in the container, you can

* **either mount a volume** (or multiple volumes) with the artifacts to `/opt/flink/usrlib` when you start
the Flink image as a Single Job Master and the required number of TaskManagers:

    ```sh
    docker run \
        --mount type=bind,src=/host/path/to/job/artifacts1,target=/opt/flink/usrlib/artifacts/1 \

>         --mount type=bind,src=/host/path/to/job/artifacts2,target=/opt/flink/usrlib/artifacts/2 \

Author: I was being verbose here to hint that you can mount from multiple locations

    docker run \
        flink_with_job_artifacts standalone-job \
        --job-classname com.job.ClassName \
        --job-id <job id> \
        [--fromSavepoint /path/to/savepoint [--allowNonRestoredState]] \
        [job arguments]

    docker run flink_with_job_artifacts taskmanager
    ```

The `standalone-job` argument starts a Flink Master container in the Single Job mode.

#### Flink Master additional command line arguments

You can provide the following additional command line arguments to the cluster entrypoint:

* `--job-classname <job class name>`: Class name of the job to run.

  By default, Flink scans its class path for a JAR with a Main-Class or program-class manifest entry and choses it as the job class.
  Use this command line argument to manually set the job class.
  This argument is required in case that no or more than one JAR with such a manifest entry is available on the class path.

* `--job-id <job id>` (optional): Manually set a Flink job ID for the job (default: 00000000000000000000000000000000)

* `--fromSavepoint /path/to/savepoint` (optional): Restore from a savepoint

  In order to resume from a savepoint, you also need to pass the savepoint path.

>   Note that `/path/to/savepoint` needs to be accessible in the docker container locally

Author: I think everywhere, we can say `in all containers` but we can remove `locally` to avoid confusion as it can be remote path.

* `--allowNonRestoredState` (optional): Skip broken savepoint state

  Additionally you can specify this argument to allow that savepoint state is skipped which cannot be restored.

If the main function of the user job main class has arguments, you can also pass them at the end of the `docker run` command.

## Customize Flink image

When you run the Flink containers, there is often a need to customize them.
The next chapters describe some how-tos of what you can usually customize.

### Configure options

When you run Flink image, you can also change its configuration options by setting the environment variable `FLINK_PROPERTIES`:

```sh
FLINK_PROPERTIES="jobmanager.rpc.address: host
taskmanager.numberOfTaskSlots: 3
blob.server.port: 6124
"
docker run --env FLINK_PROPERTIES=${FLINK_PROPERTIES} flink:{% if site.is_stable %}{{site.version}}-scala{{site.scala_version_suffix}}{% else %}latest{% endif %} <jobmanager|standalone-job|taskmanager>
```

The environment variable `FLINK_PROPERTIES` should contain a list of Flink cluster configuration options separated by new line,
the same way as in the `flink-conf.yaml`.

> The entry point script will override or add the listed options to the `flink-conf.yaml` before starting the Flink process in the container.

Author: true, I actually forgot to remove this

        flink:{% if site.is_stable %}{{site.version}}-scala{{site.scala_version_suffix}}{% else %}latest{% endif %} <jobmanager|standalone-job|taskmanager>
    ```

* or add them to your **custom Flink image**, build and run it:

    ```dockerfile
    FROM flink
    ADD /host/path/to/flink-conf.yaml /opt/flink/conf/flink-conf.yaml
    ADD /host/path/to/log4j.properties /opt/flink/conf/log4j.properties
    ```

<span class="label label-warning">Warning!</span> The mounted volume must contain all necessary configuration files.
The `flink-conf.yaml` file must have write permission so that the docker entry point script can modify it in certain cases.

### Using plugins

As described in the [plugins]({{ site.baseurl }}/ops/plugins.html) documentation page: in order to use plugins they must be
copied to the correct location in the Flink installation for them to work.

If you want to enable some optional plugins provided with Flink, you can just pass an environment variable `ENABLE_BUILT_IN_PLUGINS`
when you run the Flink image.
The `ENABLE_BUILT_IN_PLUGINS` should contain a list of plugin jar file names separated by `;`.

    ```sh
    docker run \

>         --env ENABLE_BUILT_IN_PLUGINS=flink-plugin1.jar;flink-plugin2.jar \

Author: True, I missed that it has to be a separate directory per plugin. The `.jar` suffix is not removed and needed to copy the file in [docker-entrypoint.sh](https://github.com/apache/flink-docker/blob/dev-master/docker-entrypoint.sh#L55). It is removed for the target directory name.

        flink:{% if site.is_stable %}{{site.version}}-scala{{site.scala_version_suffix}}{% else %}latest{% endif %} <jobmanager|standalone-job|taskmanager>
    ```

> Otherwise you can use other methods, described [here](#advanced-customization).

Author: I think it does hurt to improve linking parts of the docs. The chapters can get reordered and user might just skim certain chapters missing the bigger picture and links attract more attention.

I will though change to:
`Otherwise you can use other [advanced methods](#advanced-customization).`

> Otherwise you can use other methods, described [here](#advanced-customization).

Author: Ok, if it sounds better, just when adding links, I am trying to follow [the last best practice section of links code style in docs](https://flink.apache.org/contributing/docs-style.html#links), so I can change it to:
`There are also more [advanced ways](#advanced-customization) for customizing the Flink image.`

> Otherwise you can use other methods, described [here](#advanced-customization).

Reviewer: sounds good.

### Advanced customization

> If you want to further customize the Flink image, for example:

Author: I am trying to [avoid passive voice](https://flink.apache.org/contributing/docs-style.html#voice-and-tone). How about:
```
If you want to further customize the Flink image, for example, for the following purposes:
.... (removing the last purpose as it is the first way below)
you can achieve this in several ways:
...
```

* install custom software (e.g. python)
* enable (symlink) optional libraries or plugins from `/opt/flink/opt` into `/opt/flink/lib` or `/opt/flink/plugins`
* add other libraries to `/opt/flink/lib` (e.g. [hadoop](hadoop.html#adding-hadoop-to-lib))
* add other plugins to `/opt/flink/plugins`
* override configuration files
* override the startup script completely

> This can be usually achieved in several ways:

Author: see above

* **override the container entry point** with a custom script where you can run any bootstrap actions.

> At the end you can call the standard `/docker-entrypoint.sh` script of the Flink image with the same arguments as the image has.

Author: maybe then `with its usual arguments`? I think it can still be not fully clear how to use `docker-entrypoint.sh`

  The following example creates a custom entry point script which enables more libraries and plugins.
  The custom script, custom library and plugin are provided from a mounted volume.
  Then it runs the standard entry point script of the Flink image:

    ```sh
    # create custom_lib.jar
    # create custom_plugin.jar

    echo "

>     ln -fs /opt/flink/opt/flink-metrics-graphite-*.jar /opt/flink/lib/.  # enable an optional library

Author: how about `flink-queryable-state-runtime` then?

The next chapters show examples of configuration files to run Flink.

### Usage

* Create the `yaml` files with the container configuration, check examples for:
    * [Session cluster](#session-cluster-with-docker-compose)
    * [Single Job](#single-job-cluster-with-docker-compose)

    Check also [the Flink docker image tags](#image-tags) and [how to customize the Flink docker image](#advanced-customization)
    for usage in the configuration files.

* Launch a cluster in the foreground

    ```sh
    docker-compose up
    ```

* Launch a cluster in the background

    ```sh
    docker-compose up -d
    ```

* Scale the cluster up or down to *N* TaskManagers

    ```sh
    docker-compose scale taskmanager=<N>
    ```

* Access the Flink Master container

    ```sh
    docker exec -it $(docker ps --filter name=jobmanager --format={{.ID}}) /bin/sh
    ```

* Kill the cluster

    ```sh
    docker-compose kill
    ```

* Access Web UI

    When the cluster is running, you can visit the web UI at [http://localhost:8081](http://localhost:8081).
    You can also use the web UI to submit a job to a Session cluster.

> * To submit a job to a *Session cluster* via the command line, you must copy the JAR to the Flink Master container and

Reviewer: maybe also document that you could submit a job like usual if you have a distribution locally; after all if the WebUI is accessible then so is the REST API.

Author: is it not written above?

Author: ok, now I get it

submit the job from there. For example:

    ```sh
    JOB_CLASS_NAME="com.job.ClassName"
    MASTER_CONTAINER=$(docker ps --filter name=jobmanager --format={{.ID}})
    docker cp path/to/jar "${MASTER_CONTAINER}":/job.jar
    docker exec -t -i "${MASTER_CONTAINER}" flink run -d -c ${JOB_CLASS_NAME} /job.jar
    ```

### Session Cluster with Docker Compose

```yaml
version: "2.2"
services:
  jobmanager:
    image: flink:{% if site.is_stable %}{{site.version}}-scala{{site.scala_version_suffix}}{% else %}latest{% endif %}
    ports:
      - "8081:8081"
    command: jobmanager
    environment:
      - |
        FLINK_PROPERTIES=
        jobmanager.rpc.address: jobmanager
        taskmanager.numberOfTaskSlots: 2

  taskmanager:
    image: flink:{% if site.is_stable %}{{site.version}}-scala{{site.scala_version_suffix}}{% else %}latest{% endif %}
    depends_on:
      - jobmanager
    command: taskmanager
    scale: 1
    environment:
      - |
        FLINK_PROPERTIES=
        jobmanager.rpc.address: jobmanager
        taskmanager.numberOfTaskSlots: 2
```

> ### Single Job Cluster with Docker Compose

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Job Cluster with Docker Compose
```

The artifacts must be available in the Flink containers, check details [here](#start-a-single-job-cluster).

> Check also [how to specify the Flink Master arguments](#flink-master-additional-command-line-arguments) to understand

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See also [how to specify the Flink Master arguments](#flink-master-additional-command-line-arguments) to understand
```
I would replace all such instances.

    ```sh
    docker exec -it $(docker ps --filter name=jobmanager --format={{.ID}}) /bin/sh
    ```

* Kill the cluster

    ```sh
    docker-compose kill
    ```

* Access Web UI

    When the cluster is running, you can visit the web UI at [http://localhost:8081](http://localhost:8081).
    You can also use the web UI to submit a job to a *Session cluster*.

* To submit a job to a *Session cluster* via the command line, you must copy the JAR to the *Flink Master* container and
submit the job from there. For example:

    ```sh
    JOB_CLASS_NAME="com.job.ClassName"
    MASTER_CONTAINER=$(docker ps --filter name=jobmanager --format={{.ID}})
    docker cp path/to/jar "${MASTER_CONTAINER}":/job.jar
    docker exec -t -i "${MASTER_CONTAINER}" flink run -d -c ${JOB_CLASS_NAME} /job.jar
    ```

### Session Cluster with Docker Compose

```yaml
version: "2.2"
services:
  jobmanager:
    image: flink:{% if site.is_stable %}{{site.version}}-scala{{site.scala_version_suffix}}{% else %}latest{% endif %}
    ports:
      - "8081:8081"
    command: jobmanager
    environment:
      - |
        FLINK_PROPERTIES=
        jobmanager.rpc.address: jobmanager

>         taskmanager.numberOfTaskSlots: 2

Reviewer: curious; is this actually required for the JobManager?

Author: asaik, it only matters for active integrations atm, not for standalone, but it does not hurt and who knows future.

  taskmanager:
    image: flink:{% if site.is_stable %}{{site.version}}-scala{{site.scala_version_suffix}}{% else %}latest{% endif %}
    depends_on:
      - jobmanager
    command: taskmanager
    scale: 1
    environment:
      - |
        FLINK_PROPERTIES=
        jobmanager.rpc.address: jobmanager

>         taskmanager.numberOfTaskSlots: 2

Reviewer: I'm wondering if there is value in having the docker/kubernetes example deployments be in sync.

Author: I have changed it there to `2` as well anyways because of other concern

```

### Job Cluster with Docker Compose

The artifacts must be available in the Flink containers, check details [here](#start-a-single-job-cluster).

> See also [how to specify the Flink Master arguments](#flink-master-additional-command-line-arguments) to understand
> how to write the `command` for the `jobmanager` service.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See also [how to specify the Flink Master arguments](#flink-master-additional-command-line-arguments).
```

```yaml
version: "2.2"
services:
  jobmanager:
    image: flink:{% if site.is_stable %}{{site.version}}-scala{{site.scala_version_suffix}}{% else %}latest{% endif %}
    ports:
      - "8081:8081"
    command: standalone-job --job-classname com.job.ClassName [--job-id <job id>] [--fromSavepoint /path/to/savepoint [--allowNonRestoredState]] [job arguments]
    volumes:
      - /host/path/to/job/artifacts:/opt/flink/usrlib
    environment:
      - |
        FLINK_PROPERTIES=
        jobmanager.rpc.address: jobmanager
        taskmanager.numberOfTaskSlots: 2
        parallelism.default: 2

  taskmanager:
    image: flink:{% if site.is_stable %}{{site.version}}-scala{{site.scala_version_suffix}}{% else %}latest{% endif %}
    depends_on:
      - jobmanager
    command: taskmanager
    scale: 1
    volumes:
      - /host/path/to/job/artifacts:/opt/flink/usrlib
    environment:
      - |
        FLINK_PROPERTIES=
        jobmanager.rpc.address: jobmanager
        taskmanager.numberOfTaskSlots: 2
        parallelism.default: 2
```

{% top %}

## Flink with Docker Swarm

> The [Docker swarm](https://docs.docker.com/engine/swarm) is a container orchestration tool, meaning
> that it allows the user to manage multiple containers deployed across multiple host machines.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [Docker swarm](https://docs.docker.com/engine/swarm) is a container orchestration tool, that 
allows you to manage multiple containers deployed across multiple host machines.
```

    taskmanager
```

### Job Cluster with Docker Swarm

```sh
FLINK_PROPERTIES="jobmanager.rpc.address: flink-jobmanager
taskmanager.numberOfTaskSlots: 2
"

# Create overlay network
docker network create -d overlay flink-job

# Create the Flink Master service
docker service create \
  --name flink-jobmanager \
  --env FLINK_PROPERTIES="${FLINK_PROPERTIES}" \
  --mount type=bind,source=/host/path/to/job/artifacts,target=/opt/flink/usrlib \
  -p 8081:8081 \
  --network flink-job \
  flink:{% if site.is_stable %}{{site.version}}-scala{{site.scala_version_suffix}}{% else %}latest{% endif %} \
    standalone-job \
    --job-classname com.job.ClassName \
    [--job-id <job id>] \
    [--fromSavepoint /path/to/savepoint [--allowNonRestoredState]] \
    [job arguments]

# Create the TaskManager service (scale this out as needed)
docker service create \
  --name flink-job-taskmanager \
  --replicas 2 \
  --env FLINK_PROPERTIES="${FLINK_PROPERTIES}" \
  --mount type=bind,source=/host/path/to/job/artifacts,target=/opt/flink/usrlib \
  --network flink-job \
  flink:{% if site.is_stable %}{{site.version}}-scala{{site.scala_version_suffix}}{% else %}latest{% endif %} \
    taskmanager
```

> The *job artifacts* must be available in the *Flink Master* container, check details [here](#start-a-single-job-cluster).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The *job artifacts* must be available in the *Flink Master* container, as outlined [here](#start-a-single-job-cluster).
```

> See also [how to specify the Flink Master arguments](#flink-master-additional-command-line-arguments) to understand
> how to pass the arguments to the `jobmanager` container.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See also [how to specify the Flink Master arguments](#flink-master-additional-command-line-arguments).
```

* `--fromSavepoint /path/to/savepoint` (optional): Restore from a savepoint

  In order to resume from a savepoint, you also need to pass the savepoint path.
  Note that `/path/to/savepoint` needs to be accessible in all docker containers of the cluster

>   (e.g. storing it on a DFS or from the mounted volume or adding it to the image).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  (e.g., storing it on a DFS or from the mounted volume or adding it to the image).
```

    # create custom_plugin.jar

    echo "
    ln -fs /opt/flink/opt/flink-queryable-state-runtime-*.jar /opt/flink/lib/.  # enable an optional library
    ln -fs /mnt/custom_lib.jar /opt/flink/lib/.  # enable a custom library

>     mkdir -p /opt/flink/plugins/flink-s3-fs-hadoop

Reviewer: well that's inconvenient isn't it :/ Nothing we can fix though on this end.

Author: not atm as I understand, it is basically copied from the `plugins` how-to.
we should have packed it respectively in `/opt/flink/opt` which is another issue.
